Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. Charles Sheffield is a relatively new name in
the field of science fiction but he's published first-class stories and novels
since 1976. Sheffield is a practicing scientist and as you might expect his work
can be categorized as hard science fiction. His novels include Sight of Proteus,
Web Between the Worlds, and My Brother's Keeper. He's also had three volumes of
short stories published. We spoke with Sheffield recently and asked him how he
first got involved in science fiction. I read it from the time I was about 13 or
14 years old but where I was living the idea of fandom was unknown at the time. I
was raised in East Yorkshire in England and so far as I knew for a long time, in
fact until I went off to the university, I was the only person I knew who read
science fiction and then when I got to the university I found it was not all
that uncommon. But at least until I was 18 it was a private activity and there
was no organized effort. There were no groups of people discussing it. There were
no conventions or anything like that. It was a solitary reading activity and I
got into it uh simply because I was interested in science and it was the only
type of writing apart from science fact that appealed to someone interested in
science. There wasn't much of it around of course. The period I'm talking about
there were no English magazines that I recall and about the only things that
came over from the United States were Astounding, which then became Analog, and
Galaxy and occasionally Amazing Stories and Fantastic Stories and that was about
it. We asked Sheffield if he had had a long apprenticeship with rejection slips
before selling his first story. It was a reasonably long one. Uh I can't say that
I'm I'm I had an endless string of rejections. I started to write in '76 and
didn't have any previous background of trying to write fiction of any kind so I
wasn't too discouraged because I realized in my first story or two that I was
evolving rapidly. In other words I could reread things of a few months before and
say my lord no wonder nobody would buy that. But once Sheffield hit his stride,
his stories became familiar to readers of the science fiction magazines. They
were always exciting and inventive. Sheffield, as we mentioned earlier, belongs to
that small group of science fiction writers who are practicing scientists. He has
a degree in theoretical physics and is a vice president of the Earth Satellite
Corporation of Washington DC. We asked him what the corporation does. What we do
is we take information from satellites that look at the earth as opposed to
looking out in space somewhere and we use that information in looking for
natural resources on the earth and in measuring them and monitoring them. So for
instance we have exploration programs in which we look for oil and gas and
minerals around the world. We have other projects in which we analyze the
condition of surface water or of land use. We're just finishing a big project. The
state of Pennsylvania looking at their abandoned mine lands to see what
condition they're in and that's done from sometimes from aerial observations in
aircraft but mostly we use satellite data. The company is now approaching
thirteen years old and in a sense was started too soon. I was there at the
beginning, but our first few years were very difficult because we found that we
were in a field in which almost no one knew what we were doing and we would
spend lots of our time trying to explain to people the potential that we
believed we could see in the field. Well, now enough people have seen examples
of it that we find it much easier. So things have become much smoother for the
company in the last few years. Next time, we'll talk with Charles Sheffield
about his work.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon. Charles Sheffield's popular and provocative
1979 novel, The Web Between the Worlds, concerns a so-called space elevator. A
space elevator is a satellite that is tethered to the Earth. Of course, it would
always remain above the same spot on the Earth's surface, or in other words, it
would be in geosynchronous orbit. Sheffield has his engineers build a satellite
in the tether, which is hundreds of kilometers long, out in space. The end of
this beanstalk, as it's called, is then guided toward a point on the Earth's
equator. A huge hole is waiting for it. As the end of the beanstalk enters the
hole, millions of tons of dirt and rock are exploded over it, firmly anchoring
it. Since Sheffield is a practicing physicist, he describes the whole touchy
operation in believable scientific language. We ask him, though, if this method
of anchoring a space elevator is a feasible one. It's about the only way, I
think, in practice. You have to hold the thing down by weight on the Earth's
end. In other words, what you've got to do is to make sure there's just enough
mass at the bottom sitting there. Now, there's several ways you could propose to
do that. One is to build the satellite from orbit at synchronous altitude down
to the Earth, and then anchoring it is an easier job, because you can put
material into it a little at a time. You can bootstrap, if you like, and make a
very small cable and gradually build up to a larger one. I think that the
technology we will have in 100 years' time, though, is such that things we now
consider hair-raising and scary and difficult, people will take for granted. To
give an analogy, I like to quote, if you told people 100 years ago that there'd
be hundreds of tons of metal up above the cities, they'd say, well, you could
never sleep at night because you'd be afraid they'd fall on top of you all the
time. But now people just curse aircraft because of the noise. They don't
actually think that there's hundreds of tons of metal suspended up there. And
we're not in constant fear of things collapsing because we have some trust in
the technology. I believe 100 or 150 years from now, things we now consider hair
-raising and scary will be commonplace, which is why I chose a more way-out
method of anchoring the beanstalk than the simplest one. Though the book deals
with numerous scientific concepts and theories, it's an exciting, fast-paced
story that should please any reader of science fiction. One of the non-human
characters in the book is a giant squid named Caliban. Caliban seems to be
intelligent. He lives on the artificial water world of Atlantis and communicates
with humans with the aid of a computer. We asked Sheffield where he got the idea
of using a giant squid as a character. I needed... Well, for several reasons.
One is I'm very interested in cephalopods, in the squid and the octopus, because
they are the most advanced invertebrate animals. And I had known for quite a
while that squids and octopuses are supposed to be very smart creatures. So when
I wanted a very difficult being to communicate with, the obvious first thought,
which many people do, is to have a computer as a character. But I felt, since I
had a water world in Atlantis, it would be more interesting for me to create a
situation in which the sea creature, Caliban, communicates with the humans only
with the help of a computer. In other words, the computer is an essential part
of the communication process, and the relationship between the computer and
Caliban is a very complex one that even the human characters in the book say
they don't totally know what's going on. I simply felt that was more interesting
than perhaps having a computer as an instrument. A smart computer has been done
quite a lot, but I felt the computer and cephalopod combination hadn't been done
anywhere that I could see and was a more interesting thing to write about. We'll
continue our talk with Charles Sheffield on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. Charles Sheffield's most recent science
fiction novel, published in 1982, is entitled My Brother's Keeper, and it's a
departure from his normal style. It's a fast-paced book, as all of Sheffield's
works are. But it's set in the very near future, and it reads like a spy novel.
Sheffield talks about it. With that book, I actually tried to write in a
different style than the one I usually write. I tried, I've been, I'm very fond
of a man who writes straight thrillers, a man called Dick Francis, who doesn't
write science fiction. He usually writes about horses, as a matter of fact, and
he's an English writer. And one of the things I liked about Dick Francis is he
writes an extremely fast-moving book. And I decided to see if I could write a
faster-moving book than I had written before. And that's what My Brother's
Keeper was my attempt to do it within the science fiction framework. The science
fiction aspects of the story concerns introsomatic chips, tiny microcomputer
devices which are implanted in the human body to control various physiological
functions. Twin brothers named Leo and Lionel are the main characters in the
story. Leo leads an exciting life of intrigue and danger as a government agent
involved with the introsomatic chips. And Lionel is a conservative man who is a
world-renowned concert pianist, hearted the adventuresome type. After a
helicopter accident involving the two brothers, Leo is dying. He is saved, in a
sense, by a brilliant doctor-scientist who removes part of his brain and
attaches it to Lionel's. Their personalities are sort of integrated then, and
they slowly become one new person. What had been happening through the book is
that it begins, Lionel, although he is the one with the consciousness, he's the
one who thinks he knows who he is when they recover consciousness, has always
been the subordinate partner. His brother Leo had always been the stronger
personality, the more outgoing one, and really the dominant one. Now, through
the book, Lionel is gradually taking on more of his brother's characteristics.
And certainly at the beginning of the book, Lionel would never have dreamed of
going off and chasing danger, because it wasn't his disposition. So that by the
end, they have somewhat fused in personality, to the point where it's Leo who is
really driving them along to go out and go after the criminals for the same
reason he had always done it, which is that it was the best form of excitement.
He got excitement from it, and he said at the end that there's really no thrill
like it, which is this type of chase. But that, in a sense, is Leo's personality
speaking by that point. Lionel was the somewhat quiet and retiring twin, but by
the end of the book, it's no longer Lionel who is making most of the decisions.
Leo has again become the dominant twin in a psychological sense. That's the
thing I had in mind.
The brain operation which joins the two brothers is not feasible presently, but
Sheffield says it may not be too long before the technique becomes possible.
This is a typical Sheffield story, and then it's based on techniques or devices
that are just over the horizon that may be possible in a decade or two. Right.
Sheffield is a convincing extrapolator, too, because he is a practicing
scientist with a Ph.D. in theoretical physics. We asked Sheffield if he writes
his stories to seriously examine such concepts, or if he's just playing around
with wild ideas. It depends on the story. If I believe that the device is
technologically possible and that someday we will have it, then I try to develop
the consequences of that rather seriously. And in a sense, I'm attempting
prediction as opposed to writing entertainment. But on the other hand, if I
don't really believe something is likely to happen at all, then I'm writing for
the fun of it. I'm writing and don't expect to be taken seriously. We'll
continue our conversation with Charles Sheffield on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon. One of the more fascinating collections of
fantasy stories to come out in recent years is Charles Sheffield's 1982 book,
Erasmus Magister. Sheffield is a scientist, and he's noted as an author of hard
science fiction stories, but he also writes in various styles and on unexpected
subjects, as Erasmus Magister demonstrates. The title refers to the main
character in all of the book's stories, Erasmus Darwin, who lived in England's
18th century and was the grandfather of Charles Darwin. We asked Sheffield if
Erasmus was a real historical figure. Yes, I've been interested in him for a
long time. As somebody I found much more fascinating as a personality than his
grandson, Charles Darwin. Erasmus Darwin I had known about since I first went to
Cambridge because he attended the same college at Cambridge as I did, and there
were books about him in the library and so on, and so I have an early
fascination with him. And I found him especially interesting because he did so
many different things and was a poet and a philosopher and an inventor and a
famous physician, and he's just a fascinating combination. I decided that what I
would try to do would be to have him apply his powers of observation, which were
famous throughout Europe in his day. He was noted for being able to diagnose
diseases by looking at people and observing them closely. I decided that that
power of observation would serve him well if he had to solve other mysteries. He
was also a person who was strongly rationalistic. He didn't believe in
supernatural explanations. So I decided there that it would be logical for him,
through his powers of observation and deduction, to seek and find rational
explanations to things that everyone else in the story thought were
supernatural, which was very reasonable 200 years ago. People were very ready to
believe supernatural answers to most things. So that was the logic behind the
stories. There are three stories in the volume, "The Devil of Malkirk", "The
Treasure of Odirex", and "The Lambeth Immortal". And they're extremely difficult to
categorize. Sheffield talks about them. They were published in different places,
and it's an interesting point. The first one was published as a fantasy in
fantastic stories. The second one was published in Alfred Hitchcock's Mystery
Magazine. And the third one, in time I'm talking now, in data publication, was
published in fantasy and science fiction. Now, in practice, "The Devil of Malkirk"
was the last one written. That's the first one in Erasmus Magister, but I wrote
that last. But I was not quite sure when I was writing them whether I was
writing science fiction or fantasy or some type of historical detective. And I
finally decided it really didn't make any difference. I was trying to tell a
story about what I consider to be a very interesting real person. And I tried to
get the facts about Erasmus Darwin accurate so that I was not doing any
distortion to his beliefs and views or life history. But I permitted myself
license when it came to the things that happened to him. So it was an
interesting, it was a very interesting set of stories to write. Sort of very
difficult to write, I don't know why. Perhaps because I was trying to put myself
back in the 18th century framework. In each story, there is an apparently
supernatural happening or creature that puzzles or bedevils some part of
England. The first story, "The Devil of Malkirk", for instance, deals with what we
today call the Loch Ness Monster. The stories are delightful reading. They're
exciting, highly literate, and convincingly communicate the atmosphere of the
18th century English countryside. A reader of science fiction will find them to
be different fare, certainly, but all the more enjoyable and refreshing because
they are. Sheffield says there will be more Erasmus Darwin stories, too, so keep
an eye out for them. We'll finish our conversation with Charles Sheffield on our
next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. Though Charles Sheffield is noted as an
author of hard science fiction stories, he sometimes writes narratives which are
fantastic or humorous. His stories on Erasmus Darwin, for example, are
illustrations of historical fantasy, but he's also done a series of stories that
are pure humor. And at least once that humor had a larger purpose or message to
it. The story entitled The Man Who Stole the Moon, which appeared in the
December 1980 edition of the science fiction paperback magazine Destinies, made
a serious comment on the United States space program. But it did so in a
humorous way, with a clever twist in one of Robert Heinlein's classic short
stories, "The Man Who Stole the Moon". We asked Sheffield if he meant that story
to have a strong message, and if he's had much reader response to it. It was
very much influenced by Heinlein's story, The Man Who Sold the Moon, and it was
preaching a bit. And I think that's an example where you said there was a
message, and I say I was preaching. But I haven't really had any response. And
I'm not quite sure what response I would expect for that. I think that most
people who read it and approve of it are already upset at the way we seem to be
unable to have an effective space program. So the only sort of letters I might
think I would get would be people who would agree with it. The humorous series
that he's done involves two bumbling lawyers named Henry Carver and Waldo
Burmeister. These stories seem to have no messages or preaching at all. They're
pure farcical humor, cleverly done and chock full of puns. A couple of their
titles indicate their farcical nature. "The Dalmatian of Faust" and "Parasites
Lost". Sheffield calls the stories his sewage series. We ask him why. Well,
because two of the first three involved...
Well, let me put it differently. The first one of all was one involving the
Matin link, which was not particularly loathsome in any way. But then the next
one was about one of the lawyers who was working in charge of the sewers on a
space station. That was "Dinsdale Dissents". Unduly falls into the sewer. Then
another one, which is "The Dalmatian of Faust", the same individual again falls
into a different sewer. And generally speaking, I regard those stories as
stories in which I take ideas that people have said are gross and unpleasant and
loathsome and disgusting and put them into stories. And one evening at dinner,
we made a long list of things that people found generally distasteful. And the
suggestion was I should just write my way through the list until I got to the
end. And I find that that's all right to a limited extent if you're writing what
you hope are humorous stories, like "Parasites Lost" is about a truffle pig. And
"The Deimos Plague" is another in the series in which a man has to safeguard two
large pigs, taking them out to Mars. The stories generally are not intended to
have any message, as you might say the man who stole the moon has, or any
redeeming features. I just write them because I find them amusing. It's very
hard to tell whether readers find them amusing or not. We asked Sheffield if
he'll write any more of these humorous stories. Well, I have one that's sitting
there somewhat. I've got about eight pages, and I stopped and did other things.
A story called "Space Opera", which involves the same characters, and what happens
when this producer decides to stage a modern opera which has been written. It's
called Balaclava. And they decide to stage it in free fall with the charge of
the Light Brigade and other complications. But I haven't written the rest of it
because I've been too busy writing other things. It's sitting there over on the
desk there, and sometime I'll write it. But I write those occasionally with no
fixed timetable, just when I feel like it. Let's hope Charles Sheffield gets
some more of these stories out. Humor and science fiction can be refreshing.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.